It's right over here, I don't even think about it.
And you can just mention when we were chatting that you've been working on this for seven years, but I think the innocence of this, as you point out, in the office now goes back.
Many years.
Yeah, yeah, no, I mean, I started writing about music almost 30 years ago now, and really about this whole... I'm just going to put this here, okay?
Okay.
Which way is the mic going to put it up?
Okay, good.
Just this whole range of, you know, American music from Muddy Waters and Otis Redding and...
to Sam Cooke, Solomon Brooks, and Elvis Presley.
And so I really, it was from the time I first started writing about music, he was part of this panorama.
And I guess I still continue to see him as part of this continuum of great American vernacular music.
That wasn't the most daunting thing because in fact there had only been a couple of full-length biographies written
and uh jerry hopkins original biography was written in elvis's lifetime and uh and he's a very accomplished piece of reportage and then elaine dundee's book elvis and gladys uh is a wonderful book about his growing up in tupelo but but most of the books are memoirs uh some of them are good you know some of them are very good but an awful lot of them are just you know philly
or, you know, they're definitely confined to the person's point of view, whether they're good or bad.
So that wasn't what was so daunting.
What was daunting for me was trying to overcome my own preconceptions to set aside, particularly from having written about him a number of times in the past, to set aside whatever preconceptions I had formed or, you know, the kinds of you go in with certain sets
a circumspect vision of how things developed, and I wanted to really go in almost with a blank slate and try to look at the thing fresh based on primary materials and based on interview material that I developed.
Yeah, you did that several hundred times.
Yeah, yeah.
I think the hardest thing is winning people's confidence.
I had somewhat of an advantage in that I was familiar with the world.
I knew a lot of people within it.
I had met people like Sam Phillips, Scotty Moore, and Marion Keister who were principal players going back 15 or 20 years.
And many of the people that I knew led me to other people.
But still, it's a natural concern.
People have an understandable concern as to what the material is going to be used for.
There's been so much exploitation, not just at Elvis's,
memory, but I mean, in general, I think that, you know, you have a tabloid press, and so I think people have understandable skepticism, and you just had to win, you know, win that over.
In some cases I did, in some cases I didn't.
You're right, it's no apprehension that you're going to be an iconoconist.
Yeah, I don't know if iconoclasts, because, I mean, I hope I was an iconoclast.
I didn't mean to serve the iconic aspect of it, but from the standpoint of, you know, Albert Goldman's book has been extremely negative.
There's been a lot, you know, a lot of negative threats.
I think more than that, I think people, I think altogether, understandably, people treasure their memories just as
You and I might have our own personal memory.
Address the Goldman book, if you will.
Is this kind of a, you know, spoken in the same context, but it is obviously kind of a kind of approach in a different approach.
It's a, you know, one of the Kitty Kelly school of... His is kind of a...
It's just a biography with attitude, in a sense.
I mean, I think it's much more, in a sense, it ends up being more of a self-portrait than a portrait of somebody else because he puts an attitude on everything that he reports.
There's stuff in there from the colonel's background, which came originally from Dirk Salenga, a Dutch journalist, whom I believe Goldman credits, but it has never been out here.
So, I mean, there certainly are things in there which are worthwhile, but it's...
every story is coated with a smear and it just isn't it isn't the kind of thing I think when it came out I took it you know I took it much more personally than I do now but it I mean at this point it offended you?
it offended my sensibilities but I think I'm not so squeamish now and also I don't I mean I'm not I feel like no matter what you can't
set the record straight as such.
I mean, you write something, somebody else comes along and writes something else.
You can't control what other people write, and all you can do is to set out the truth as best you see it.
So I guess one of the people that I most admired, Doc Thomas, a songwriter who wrote Save the Last Dance for Me, just a wonderful person, very wise man, very human in every way.
and he was great friends with Albert Goldman, and I don't think he liked the book much, but he always stressed that the person was entirely different than the book, and I think when I was younger, I didn't believe that, and I've come to him.
You did mention preconceptions, if you could just articulate something, but did you bring the baggage to the project?
I think the biggest baggage was scenes, stories, and set scenes.
I mean, if you take something like the first session, the first son session,
i had written about that a number of times and it amounted and i'm not repudiating what i wrote but the way in which i wrote about it it was almost as if it was a an anecdote and what i tried to do in this book was to imagine the feelings of the people to imagine what sam phillips brought to it and i mean i got this from interviews that i had done in the past and new interviews that i did but i think i just never thought about it in the human dimension what i thought about was
this led to this, this was A and then came B and then came C. What I was trying to do here was to look at A just when nobody knew what it was going to lead to and what the drama of the moment was rather than what the arc of the career was.
That was an entirely different perspective and that was a preconception that I tried to set aside.
at every point along the way.
And I'm not saying I succeeded, but that was my aspiration.
I mean, in the book, there's a number of things for me, sir, as a professional reader.
It is that, you know, I grew up in 51.
They were 20.
You know, and I'm a creature of his experience.
And social history is very accurate.
I'm a big reader of pen notes and you know, bibliography and documentation.
I really did the thing professionally.
Did you feel that this was a work of social history?
Yeah, and it was very much an attempt to set Elvis within a social and musical context and to bring to the fore not only people like Sam Phillips, who I think his role, it's not that their role was not hailed, and I don't mean to applaud myself as a pioneer.
I mean, everybody cited Sam Phillips, but I wanted to try to
portray his role better, but not just Sam Phillips, people like Tom Perryman, T. Tommy Contrere, Biff Colley, the disc jockey in Houston, Tillman Franks on the Louisiana Hayride, Horace Logan.
I mean, there are all these dramas intersecting, and there are all these people whose influence, in the terms of making the world which Elvis grew up in, was just as great on Elvis as Elvis' was on later generations, and the fact that they are relatively obscure today or not as well known,
doesn't diminish in any way their contribution or the contribution or the drama of the story.
I think there's a great fallacy of our time that is only the most celebrated who deserves to be, you know, documenting because the stories of someone like Doc Farmer, his story is as dramatic and as revelatory as anything you could ever run across.
His songwriter, yeah.
And...
But, you know, we live in a culture of celebrity, and I, you know, I mean, this is sort of a dichotomy, because, I mean, obviously I'm writing about a celebrity, but I wanted to portray the world.
I wanted to portray it, and again, I'm not sure that I conveyed it, that Elvis was as admiring of Bobby Blue Gland and Sam Cooke as people are today of Elvis, and not without reason.
And he aspired to be their peer.
He didn't aspire, he never saw himself as,
team of rock and roll or as their superior in any way.
I'm fundamentally a writer who happened into writing about music.
I've written about ten novels of which I've published one, published part of another, and I left off in the middle of a manuscript, which I hope to get back to.
which has nothing to do with music at all.
A novel that... Night Out Blues is a novel.
But as I say, that's the only one I publish.
It's the only one that has to do with music.
Part of another, about 80 pages of another, was published in a paperback anthology.
Then I left off at a second draft, about a 400-page novel that I hope to get back to.
When I got caught up in the Elvis
So, I mean, from my point of view, I'm not interested particularly in repeating myself.
I mean, I just see it all as a realm of, I guess, imaginative writing.
I started writing about music after I'd already written two or three novels at that point, not published, but published a couple of collections of stories.
A guy in Cambridge named Larry started his own press, and the first
book that he put out or pamphlet was a collection of my stories, which he published when I was 20.
And then I got almost grown in other stories.
And then I did a, he did about 10 or 12 books, I'd say over the, you know, they're pamphlet types of books.
And I did a second collection of stories and, you know, had a story published in Transatlantic Review then.
And that was what I saw as
That was my ambition.
That was what I felt my future.
Yeah.
But then all of a sudden, this music press started up, what is now the Boston Phoenix, started up as a supplement for the Harvard Business School newspaper.
It's like an advertising supplement, and somebody there got the idea of writing these little previews of
music that was coming to town as a way of getting advertising from the club.
So I wrote about Muddy Waters, and I wrote about James Brown.
I mean, somebody came to me and asked me.
Larry Stack was writing about the theater, and so he came and said, how would you like to write?
And I said, oh my God, this would be incredible, because to set down those names, Muddy Waters, Chuck Berry, James Brown, Jerry Lee Lewis, Elvis Presley, and to set down the names,
There was no way you could write those names.
You didn't see the names in the newspapers.
There was no music press except for a fan magazine.
It was about, I'd say, probably the first was 64, 65.
Yeah.
And Crawdaddy started up right around that time.
A kid named Paul Williams, whom I had known.
He was younger than I was.
And he was a sophomore or a half of it.
And he started up Crawdaddy with his predecessor.
of Rolling Stone, and he asked me, I was in Club 47 one night, he came in to interview Harlan Wolfe, and he said, how would you like to do this?
He didn't know anything about Harlan Wolfe.
I said, oh my God, this is my idol.
But my whole purpose in doing that was to tell people about this music that I thought was so great, that this was obscure at the time, and there was no end.
a pure application that was done out of it was out of purely out of enthusiasm and that's how i always thought and so i've continued to be you know i've always i've never written about anything except what interests me i've never written about anything that i didn't have real passion for and i can honestly say i don't think i've ever written a story that wasn't about someone that i believed was really and that's been true whether it's been about music or it's been i've written i wrote about uh henry green
the English writer, Zora Neale Hurston, this is before her rediscovery.
I wrote about this guy, Jim, Martin Baptist, Jim Wilcox.
I did a big thing on the LA Weekly a few years ago before his discovery.
And the reason I wrote about them was because I was so excited about them.
And they were always written as celebrations in the sense of something that I thought was great.
That's my motivation.
Did you have a contract with it for seven years?
Yeah, yeah.
No, I mean, I wouldn't have gone into it.
I mean, I couldn't have gone into it.
I had written a couple of collections of profiles, eventually.
I feel like going home on the last highway.
Then I did what I conceived of as a narrative history, the sweet soul music, which was really about black music and civil rights in the 60s.
reason i i mean i could have done it as profiles but i wanted to do something different i just sort of was you know i didn't want i don't i've never wanted to repeat myself and then i got the idea from a variety of inspirations of doing this book about alvis and i really didn't know that is one book or one book yeah it was one book until the summer of 92 when i was well into the writer when you thought it was going to be a possible
Plus, I like the division.
Perfect.
He was totally just seeing it as two different stories.
I was well into the writing of what was going to be a single volume, and I just suddenly came to me that after his mother's death, it was as if a curtain had come down.
You know, a curtain came down, and then when the curtain came up, it was act two.
Well, I mean, this is all like a story in Sweden.
It's true, isn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
No, it's just two very, very different stories.
And I wrote to my editor then.
Well, this is a different editor.
He's my age.
That's right, yeah.
That was somewhat coincidental.
I was with another publisher before, but I wrote to my editor of my life very much.
I said, you know, sit down, you're going to think I'm crazy, but let me tell you something.
I wrote to her about doing two volumes.
It didn't turn out to be present.
It's wonderful that they agreed.
Well, that's a long, drawn-out story.
It isn't worth going into it.
I'm interested in the publishing stuff as well.
I'm not necessarily going to call them.
No, I don't want to go into this on the record, but I'll tell you when we get done, I'll tell you about that.
Okay, that'll be fine.
I'm used to it.
So, just give me a little bit of biographical stuff.
It may be in this PW thing, which I'll have with the Franks to go.
Yeah, Wendy Smith.
I don't know if she's there, but she did the interview.
Tell me what you want to know.
I grew up here, went to college at Columbia and BU too.
I don't know.
Is it a professional writer basically in your adult life, I guess?
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, really, that's the only two things I ever wanted to be were a writer.
I mean, this is literally from the age of five or six on.
I wanted to be a writer and I wanted to be a baseball player.
And I pursued both for the best of my abilities.
Here we are.
Tell me about the fascination of the music.
I mean, it's the Elvis book.
I mean,
Do you follow the label of love, or you did mention the fashion?
It's completely.
I wouldn't write about it if it weren't.
But you don't let your sympathetic viewpoint tell her the conclusion?
No, no, no.
I want to tell the truth about it, but it's like if I write about someone like Merle Haggard,
or if I write about Bobby Blue Gland or if I write about Muddy Waters.
I write because I'm drawn to the subject, I'm drawn to the music, I hire them as artists, but I'm trying to tell their story without falsification.
I'm trying to tell their stories as truly as I can.
When I first started writing, one of the first things I wrote was about Charlie Rich, and I've never felt a greater feeling of kinship with anybody.
This was before he was nowhere when I met
just playing the tea dance and the vapors out by the Memphis airport in 69 or 70 and I wrote and he talked about being an alcoholic and just about you know it was a fairly down story and that's what I wrote about and I wrote with what I felt was empathy but I thought when the book came out I thought oh god I'll never see Charlie again you know and because you know I thought he would be offended even though it was his his view that I was
I mean, he told his story very honestly, and I tried to tell it as best I could understand it equally honestly.
But then I remember the publisher called me and said, well, Charlie Rich ordered 25 copies to his family, and we've been friends ever since.
But the point was, I wasn't going to tell a false story to preserve.
Did you feel about what you've written, fiction, stories, magazines?
music finishes and all the other things that you've mentioned.
And now, whole biography eventually will expand with the two writers.
But did you really feel that there is the mission of a biography?
Did you feel any kind of a mandate?
What is the mandate for a biographer?
I know Joe's back was very specific feelings about what a biographer is responsible for.
I just think that it's the same mission in any writing way.
I think more than that, it's painting the landscape.
It's populating with people who live and breathe.
It's giving a sense of how life is lived.
I don't see it as much different than any other form of writing.
But I don't have any great theories about it.
I didn't go into it with a theory.
In this case, I wanted to portray Elvis' world.
I wanted to
put music at the center of it.
I wanted to show life as best I could.
I wanted to show life as it was lived by him and by the other.
And I just felt like there was this great landscape and was populated by all these great figures, you know, from Sam Phillips to... Was there any sensation there?
I mean, given the relationship that you weren't quite tellingly
I mean, where's the temptation to be one of these psycho biographies here for you?
No, I really don't.
Yeah, I just don't.
No, no, I mean, to me, my whole aesthetic, whether it's fiction or nonfiction,
is what you know the kind of thing that william carlos williams expressed which is basically uh no ideas but the thing it's to portray no ideas but you know but in things okay but it's to i i made up a quote right right but it's to portray it's to portray the moment as truly as you can it's to portray the advantage when i was in high school we read a poem by william carlos williams which was um
So much depends upon a red wheelbarrow with a white chicken to the side.
I'm not quoting it right, but it was given to us as an example of an inadequate poetic response.
And to me, like, this was a great poem.
It was in the textbook.
But I mean, whether it's William Carlos Williams or it's Alison Rose stories or it's
uh taylor branches parting the waters the book about martin luther king or it's richard um uh richard holmes's footsteps seems to me the whole thing is to give a sense of life as it's lived that that's my that's my invention um my aspiration did all this pretty much emerge as you expected or were there any big surprises i think the the greatest surprise was the deepening
of the portrait, the way in which he revealed himself and the way in which he revealed himself to other people, not always the people that he would most expect because sometimes he was carrying on, you know, he felt compelled to convey an image.
But for instance, when with someone like Jun Juan Ico, who he met
or whom he went out with in the summer of 56 and had a you know this idea of his being able to draw a distinction between the public and the private self and pulling her into the bathroom as if he were reprimanding her and saying you know baby you were right i'm sorry and then walking out again in front of his friends and actually swaggering out and acting like he had just put her in her place that kind of self-awareness and also the
Well, the kinds of, the revelations that he made to Dixie Locke, particularly at his mother's, well, after his mother's funeral, I think of the kinds of things that showed a sensitivity, a self-awareness, a sense of himself that went beyond, not what I suspected, but what I might have hoped to be able to find.
Even the, essentially, the explicit acknowledgement of his musicals,
heritage.
One of the things that first spurred me to write the book, among other things, was finding this interview that he had done with a Charlotte, North Carolina observer, I think, and it was in a book by a Dutch collector named Gare Riff, R-I-G-F-F, and put out called Long Lonely Highway, which was a collection of cliffs.
But there he is in this interview in 1956 telling the
interviewer that if he can ever be half the singer that Asher Big Boy Kudup is, then he'll make music like the world has never known.
And this fulfilled a fantasy that my friends and I had projected.
I mean, we discovered Elvis through the blues, actually.
I mean, you asked me before about what motivated me in terms of music.
I just fell into the blues when I was 15 years old in 1959.
I mean, up till then, I sort of had had the same
musical experiences as anyone else.
But you can imagine what it was.
It was like it just turned me around.
I'd never heard anything like it before.
I didn't have a definition for it.
Almost in the first moment I heard it, this friend of mine, Bob Smith, I had gone to the Newport Folk Festival, or a friend of his had, but we started listening to these records, a range of folk music, and within days,
we had zeroed in on the blues and we were listening to Lycan Hopkins and Big Bill Brunzi and Muddy Waters and Furry Lewis.
And it was at that point that I recognized what it was in Elvis' music that they had drawn me to.
I'd never been able to name it.
And it was right around that time that RCA put out two albums which included his son's size, which were at least primarily, if not, I mean, which were largely, if not predominantly blues.
And it just, it knocked me out.
I just listened to that stuff over and over and over again.
That's all right, you know, mystery train, good rockin' tonight.
And so, I mean, it's a funny way to have gotten into it, but that was, and this friend of mine, this Bob Smith, Bob Smith and I just developed this fantasy at that point that Elvis was a blues thing.
And this was like in 59, and every time he would record anything but a blues, which was most of the time, we would say, you know, they made him do it.
And so the weird thing was, 20 years later, whenever it was, well, more than 20 years later, 30 years later, to discover this interview where he's talking about Arthur Bigway put up in the terms that we would have liked to have put in his mouth.
And we were laughing at ourselves.
We recognized how ridiculous it was.
But, I mean, it was the revelation.
There were no revelations.
It was the sense.
of how absolutely, how consumed he was with music, how much of a, how important it was in his life, how central it was in his life.
This was the thing which I would have liked to have imposed on him, you know, if I were making something up, but that wasn't what I was trying to do.
And when I began to discover this in every aspect of his early life and to recognize him as this
to see him as this recognizable figure, this kid today who's totally consumed by alternative or hip-hop or rap, and he just knows every lyric to every song, the labels, the, you know.
This was a moment of recognition, I guess.
Now, the next slide, of course, takes us from 58 to the end.
Right.
And it's going to be a much darker examination.
Yeah, yeah, right.
Your 60th birthday would be next week, right?
Right.
Heady, heady, not die.
What do you set forth somewhere else?
Okay, this is the kind of question I never know how to answer.
It's like, what would Sam Cooke have done if he lived?
At the end of his life, he was terribly lonely, terribly depressed, terribly disappointed.
You know, if you were thinking of someone that you knew in that situation, you'd hope they get through it.
If he had gotten through it, then, I mean, actually, the thing I would have wished most for him, and I'm not saying this is anything, would have been that he would have gone back to gospel music, which was his first love.
And, you know, there's a revival of the music of the Statesman and the Blackwood Brothers now.
It was still going.
And there have been a lot of reunions of singers like Jake Hess and James Blackwood and the Spears, Spear family.
I'm not talking about in a pop marketplace, but I've gotten a bunch of videos of these get-togethers.
And that's the kind of thing that
If I were to think of what he would most enjoy, that's the kind of thing that I would like to think of him as getting involved in.
That's not a commercial element.
I understand, but certainly you're as involved in what his life was as anybody.
You're talking to people and you certainly must have a sense of...
I mean, it was a pretty pathetic figure.
Why is it not a pathetic figure?
You know, pathetic isn't a word I would use.
I mean, I see him as sad, as lonely, as lost.
Like many people I've known in my own life, not as born as famous.
And, you know, I think the thing is that what you always want to do, if it's a friend of yours who falls upon
these kinds of hard times, you always want to keep in mind who the person is at the center.
The actions may be actions that, you know, you may want to walk away from, but if it's the same person, then that's what you want to keep as your focus.
And that's what I see as, you know, that's the challenge, I guess, of writing the second volume is to keep that person in the center, but that's my intention.
You mentioned off at the very beginning that you wrote a piece in 67 and you sent it.
What were you hoping for?
Nothing.
That's as close as you ever got to him personally.
That's right.
It was kind of a joke on myself.
Look, it's the same fantasy that you have when you're playing ball at the playground and you're thinking there's a scout out there who's watching.
It's the same fantasy Elvis had when he went into the Memphis Recording Service.
The man's going to come out from a booth and he's going to say, son, I'm going to make you a star.
The fantasy is to make some human connection.
The exciting part of, I guess, my writing life has been
I mean, when I think about it, is that I've made a connection with all these people that I've admired so much.
Not with Elvis, but, you know, that my life, in a sense, has been rich beyond my wildest fantasies in terms of making that connection.
So it's never, in a sense, no matter how laughable it is, it's never crazy to send out that dust.
Noah sent out looking for dry land.
But in this case, I mean, I was just tickled when I got back.
I got back because Chris was kind of stamped on the back by Elvis' record.
But, you know, it has a return address.
I just loved it, you know.
I'm sure you still have it.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And there's just sort of irony to it.
But at the same time...
You know, I said it and something came back.
So, I mean, I was just... That was a validation in a way, wasn't it?
In a very funny way, yeah.
I mean, I didn't blow it up into thinking Elvis responded, but I just was laughing at myself.
Did he come alive for you by contact with these people?
Yeah, yeah, no, completely.
I mean, but, you know, I should, I guess, qualify that by saying what I've tried to do in everything I've ever written, even short pieces, is to...
immerse myself in the world of the person I'm writing about.
One of the most frustrating experiences that I've had, and you've probably had it too, is interviews that get postponed and then postponed again.
I mean, the first time that I interviewed Merle Haggard, it was about the fifth time, it came about on a, and the point is that from my point of view, it's not a question just to, hey, well, here's the biography, I'm just going to go in and ask these questions.
Each time that I
got ready for the interview, I tried to immerse myself in the world, you know, in his world to the fullest extent that I could.
So what it meant was just plunging back into the world over and over again.
So what's great about, what was great about writing Sweet Soul Music or what's great about something like this in a sustained effort is living inside the world for a long time.
I don't mean to say that I lose track of my own world, but, you know.
Well, had you been able to, again, we're deer-inspecting this figure, but are there any unanswered questions for you?
I think there's a million questions that I'd like to ask, and mostly they would have to do with music.
I mean, it's not that I'm not interested in personal stuff.
But the work is different.
Yeah, and I feel like that...
Leaving my book aside, I mean, Elvis would be so knocked out, I think, by the attention that his music has gotten, by the fact that his music has come out in these two five-season sets of the 50s and 60s boxes.
Right.
And the fact that even, and I think that's the kind of thing, I mean, to talk to him about gospel music, to talk to him about the music he listened to, about the music that influenced him, to do the follow-up questions to all the interviews that I've listened to and read,
You know, because you want to jump into the tape recorder sometimes on interviews that he did.
What about this?
What about that?
You know, you always think that if you listen to it again, it's going to be there maybe.
But did you find that maybe most of the interviews with him are very superficial?
Well, most are, but I mean, again, you take what you can get.
I mean, I've never...
when I started writing about blues, again, there so little had been written, and I would be looking at these things that had been published in just in the most out-of-the-way places, fan club things, collectors.
I mean, I've always valued collectors and their experiences, and so it's true that
The interviews served a particular purpose.
In many cases, they were promotional.
You would have a DJ who got this hot new sensation on his show for five minutes or ten minutes.
But you try to see things from the angle at which they're being portrayed.
You try to understand that if I'm sitting here and looking at the stage, it's different from here and looking at the stage.
I've always tried to adjust my vision in that way.
And it's an odd... I think if you understand that your vision is not the only vision, that's the starting place for... And I've talked to people who, you know, it's like I talked to this one guy who Elvis appeared at his high school, did a show for the... I don't know if he'll put this in the book or not, but did a show for a student council campaign.
you know, early on, and getting a description of what the show is like.
I know I didn't put much of a man there.
The response of the kids in it.
I mean, this thing is frozen in this guy's mind.
This is the person I met through Blues 25 years ago, but he had told me then about Elvis.
He's never been interviewed as such.
It's just like this moment that has always existed, and he's very precise in his recollection.
So those kinds of things, we put all these different...
aspects together, you know, and you try to come up with a picture.
You really, I love all the teaching.
It seems that they're very painstaking there.
Insistence in getting the people, we call the tremendous pricing, the little telling details, you know, even if it's how old he was and, you know, the guitar and all the other, the little, little things, the first guitar, 11th birthday.
Right, right.
the firecrackers.
I feel like it's what makes life vivid.
It's what we remember when we tell anecdotes.
There's a wonderful passage at the end of Alison Rose, Lives of Girls and Women, where she just talks about, she's away from the town in which she grew up, which is where the novel is situated, and she just talks about that heartbreakingness, the heartbreaking vividness
of every irrelevant detail, not even the things she put in, you know.
And that, to me, that's all we've got.
I mean, the great concepts may desert us, but the red wheelbarrow, that's what will always stay with us.
It's what I remember.
I mean, I'm sure it's what, you know, we all remember growing up.
Was there any apprehension starting this?
Was there a point at which you said, I'm not going to be able to get this out of?
There's total panic, but as there has been at the beginning of everything I've ever done.
I would hate to begin with a sense of self-confidence, because I think there would be a note of falsification.
Was there something that you really wanted to get, that you were unable to get?
I'd say I want to get everything, and so I'm always disappointed, but I also try to put that into
I mean, this book would have been 2,000 pages if I'd seen it as a compendium, you know.
And I don't at all.
I don't want to tell a vivid story with characters that lived.
But the, no, I mean, there are moments of great disappointment.
I'll never, I mean, I missed this.
I mean, I didn't get this thing that I was looking for.
I wanted to get it.
Can you give me a for instance if anything comes to mind?
Sorry.
No, because it was almost a sign too great.
I mean, those moments disappear into the perspective I try to maintain, which is that I'm trying to get a picture, not the moment.
Are there any really, on the other hand, very exciting moments, and you've really gotten something, either in an interview or... I'm bad at this, because there are a million moments, and I wouldn't want to assign... Yeah, that's it.
I mean, this is really dumb, but I mean, I had to, Ernest Cobb, and this is going to be doing no good for the story, but Ernest Cobb had told me, as he told other people years and years ago, about Elvis writing him a letter after appearing on his show.
But he never specified when he appeared on the show, and the letter had been lost.
So I asked people for years afterwards about Elvis being on The Midnight Chamboree.
Nobody remembered it.
Sam Phillips didn't remember it.
Mary Keister didn't remember it.
Scotty Moore didn't remember it.
I was interviewing Scotty's ex-wife, Bobby Moore, who was telling me about a story about going over to the... Yeah.
And also... Okay, well, she had very little memory of the Opry itself, which is what I was asking her about.
She remembered driving over about Scotty being sort of annoyed that she'd shown up and then glad that she had.
And I said, so what happened?
And he went home right after the show.
She said, no, well, first we went over and they did the...
We went over to Ernest Tom's record shop.
I think they played a radio show there.
Then we went home.
I said, you went over to the Ernest Tom's record shop.
She said, yeah, that was, I said, you sure?
She said, yeah, why are you getting so excited about that?
You see, the point was everybody else had forgotten it.
Everybody else I had talked to had forgotten it.
And so that placed all the details of the story, which I'd gotten.
I had, I don't know how many interviews around this moment.
but it enabled me to put them all within the context.
And then I could use the Ernest Hobbs story, I could use the, you know, it all made sense.
So, I mean, this is of no great, it's of no cosmic significance.
But it's the architecture.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You can't frame the house.
Right, right.
How deeply are you into volume two?
I'm really at the outset of it.
I'm trying to immerse myself in that.
I'm feeling that sense of total, you know, of
of near panic or near total panic, you know, as you get it.
Is the legwork done?
Yeah.
The reason that the legwork's done is because I never conceived of doing it in two volumes.
So I was out for about, I'd say, four years, and I would go out for three weeks, come home for two weeks, go out for three weeks, you know, which was really kind of a brutal schedule because when you come home for two weeks after being gone for three weeks, you can't possibly catch up.
And during that time, I would be, you know, I might do an interview about Elvis' infancy in the morning, about his death in the afternoon, and about somewhere in between in the evening.
Did you have a date job at this time?
No, I was doing it pretty much.
Well, I mean, I was running a children's camp.
I'm waiting.
Hi, Nick.
What time do you have?
Is that a number one?
I'll let you wrap up.
I don't have my watch, but anyway, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
This was what I was doing.
Anything I need?
anything do you feel that i i need uh no i think i really you know the thing i really enjoyed this whether it's good for you or not but it's it's uh you know it's fun to be able to talk about the writing you know whether it's blues collectors i mean it's just a
Sometimes there's almost a snobbery, I think, about who your sources are, and you know, well, you know, if it's not a critic, it's not, you know, it's not, I mean, but my point is that people come to things from different enthusiasms with different backgrounds, and you should never, you know, devalue, you know, you should never fail to value people's enthusiasm.
I do have another question, which is, by the way, important.
A hundred years from now, what is all this propaganda?
Is he a cultural phenomenon?
Is he a social phenomenon?
Or is he a maker of music that will still be relevant?
I think two things.
I think he'll continue to be seen as a cultural phenomenon because I think it marks a turning point.
But I think the most important aspect will be
his musical contribution and there I think he's part of a continuum and I think that he's the beauty of the music which he introduced with us on recorders I think is undeniable if you listen to us and I think that'll be seen as part of a continuum which is not
so much revolutionary as part of this panorama of great American music.
Is this music representative of the period or is he the king?
There is no king.
I mean, I think this is a bad, you know, a bad approach to anything.
No, but it's one that he repudiated, and the whole idea of ranking anything that has to do with art of any sort, I think, is a... I think he is, as I say, part of a continuum.
And Elvis Presley, Sam Foote, Hank Williams, Lefty Frizzell, Otis Redding, Solomon Brick,
You know, these are all, there's no ranking, there's no comparing, but he made a contribution along with all of that.